docs/src/internal-build.md, before:

# Internal Build Notes / IRD

- When building the runtime we must use Ubuntu 22.04 docker image
  - When making an IRD reservation use `--docker-image
    yyz-gitlab.local.tenstorrent.com:5005/tenstorrent/infra/ird-ubuntu-22-04-amd64:latest`
- You'll have to manaully install a newer version of cmake, at least 3.22, the easiest way to do this is to `pip install cmake` and make sure this one is in your path
- You'll want LLVM installation to persist IRD reservations, you can achieve this by:
  - mkdir /localdev/$USER/ttmlir-toolchain
  - When requesting an IRD use `--volumes /localdev/$USER/ttmlir-toolchain:/opt/ttmlir-toolchain`

## Working with Docker Images

Components:
  - Dockerfile
  - Workflow for building Docker image
  - Project build using Docker image

Overview:

The [Dockerfile](.github/Dockerfile) describes how to create an image for building the tt-mlir project file. It starts with a supported base image (Ubuntu 22.04) and installs the necessary packages. The purpose of the Docker build is to:

  - Set up build dependencies
  - Prepare the tt-mlir toolchain

During the Docker build, the project is built and tests are run to ensure that everything is set up correctly. If any dependencies are missing, the Docker build will fail.

This process also prepopulates caches for Python packages and the ccache cache in the image, which should make subsequent builds faster.

### Building the Docker Image using GitHub Actions

The GitHub Actions workflow [Build and Publish Docker Image](.github/workflows/build-image.yml) builds the Docker image and uploads it to GitHub Packages at https://github.com/orgs/tenstorrent/packages?repo_name=tt-mlir. The image name is tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04, and we use the git SHA we build from as the tag.

### Building the Docker Image Locally

To test the changes and build the image locally, use the following command:
```bash
docker build -f .github/Dockerfile -t tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04:latest .
```

### Pushing the Docker Image to GitHub

Images built locally can be pushed to GitHub. First, we need to generate a PAT token with the "write:packages" access enabled. Go to GitHub -> Settings -> Developer settings -> Personal access tokens -> Generate new token.

Authenticate with GitHub Container Registry:
```bash
echo "<my-github-pat>" | docker login ghcr.io -u <username> --password-stdin
```

Add a tag to the built image:
```bash
docker tag tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04:latest ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04:latest
```

Push the image:
```bash
docker push ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04:latest
```

### Using the Image in GitHub Actions Jobs

The GitHub Actions workflow [Build in Docker](.github/workflows/docker-build.yml) uses a Docker container for building:
```yaml
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/${{ github.repository }}/tt-mlir-ubuntu-22-04:latest
      options: --user root
```

Commit message:

Multi stage docker build (#607)
Split docker image builds into steps, so now we have base image containing only build dependencies, ci image that contains prebuilt toolchain and ird image that add dev tools and ssh to these images. Also adds GDB 14.2 to IRD images.

- added GDB 14.2 to IRD images
- replace image in workflows with new ci image
- update docs
- set job timeout to 30 minutes
- add "in-service" to runner selection

docs/src/internal-build.md, after:

# Internal Build Notes / IRD

- When building the runtime we must use Ubuntu 22.04 docker image
  - When making an IRD reservation use `--docker-image
    yyz-gitlab.local.tenstorrent.com:5005/tenstorrent/infra/ird-ubuntu-22-04-amd64:latest`
- You'll have to manaully install a newer version of cmake, at least 3.22, the easiest way to do this is to `pip install cmake` and make sure this one is in your path
- You'll want LLVM installation to persist IRD reservations, you can achieve this by:
  - mkdir /localdev/$USER/ttmlir-toolchain
  - When requesting an IRD use `--volumes /localdev/$USER/ttmlir-toolchain:/opt/ttmlir-toolchain`

## Working with Docker Images

Components:
  - Dockerfile
  - Workflow for building Docker image
  - Project build using Docker image

### Overview

We use docker images to prepare project enviroment, install dependancies, tooling and prebuild toolchain.
Project builds four docker images:

Base image `tt-mlir-base-ubuntu-22-04` [Dockerfile.base](.github/Dockerfile.base)
CI image `tt-mlir-ci-ubuntu-22-04` [Dockerfile.ci](.github/Dockerfile.ci)
Base IRD image `tt-mlir-base-ird-ubuntu-22-04`[Dockerfile.ird](.github/Dockerfile.ird)
IRD image `tt-mlir-ird-ubuntu-22-04` [Dockerfile.ird](.github/Dockerfile.ird)

Base image starts with a supported base image (Ubuntu 22.04) and installs dependancies for project build. From there we build CI image that contains prebuild toolcahin and is used in CI to shoten the build time. IRD image contain dev tools like GDB, vim etc and shh and are use in IRD enviroments.

During the CI Docker build, the project is built and tests are run to ensure that everything is set up correctly. If any dependencies are missing, the Docker build will fail.

### Building the Docker Image using GitHub Actions

The GitHub Actions workflow [Build and Publish Docker Image](.github/workflows/build-image.yml) builds the Docker images and uploads them to GitHub Packages at https://github.com/orgs/tenstorrent/packages?repo_name=tt-mlir. We use the git SHA we build from as the tag.

### Building the Docker Image Locally

To test the changes and build the image locally, use the following command:
```bash
docker build -f .github/Dockerfile.base -t ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-base-ubuntu-22-04:latest .
docker build -f .github/Dockerfile.ci -t ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-ci-ubuntu-22-04:latest .
docker build -f .github/Dockerfile.ird -build-args FROM_IMAGE=base -t ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-ird-base-ubuntu-22-04:latest .
docker build -f .github/Dockerfile.ird -build-args FROM_IMAGE=ci -t ghcr.io/tenstorrent/tt-mlir/tt-mlir-ird-ubuntu-22-04:latest .
```

### Using the Image in GitHub Actions Jobs

The GitHub Actions workflow [Build in Docker](.github/workflows/docker-build.yml) uses a Docker container for building:
```yaml
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/${{ github.repository }}/tt-mlir-ci-ubuntu-22-04:latest
      options: --user root
```
