# `ttrt`

## Overview
Release Date: June 30th, 2025

Version: v1.0.0

### Summary
This tool is intended to be a swiss army knife for working with flatbuffers generated by the compiler.  Its primary role is to inspect and run flatbuffer files.  It enables the running of flatbuffer files without a front-end runtime.

### Quick links
[README.md](./README.md)
[Documentation](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md)

### Features

#### Application APIs
Application APIs expose the different options for using ttrt. They can be used as a [command line tool](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#command-line) or imported as a [python package](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#ttrt-as-a-python-package). Refer to the corresponding documentation [section](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#apis).

```bash
ttrt --help
ttrt read
ttrt run
ttrt query
ttrt perf
ttrt check
```

#### Runtime APIs
Runtime APIs offer pybound functions to interact with ttrt runtime before, during, or after execution. Refer to the corresponding documentation [section](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#bonus-section-extending-runtime-to-other-fes) for details.

#### Multi-device support
ttrt supports working with flatbuffers not just on a single n150 device but also with multi-device setups n300, llmbox, and tg. This functionality is implemented automatically through `system_desc.ttsys` generation and exportation.

#### Standalone whls release
[Installing](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#installing-ttrt-as-python-whls)

#### gdb support
`ttrt` can be relaunched inside of [gdb](../../../docs/src/ttrt.md#gdb) which can be useful for debugging C++ runtime components.

## Upcoming features
TODO: Decide whether to include planned Q3 features (and cleanup/explanations):

perf supporting multiple program flatbuffers (const-eval, training graphs)
builtin hang detection and recovery
blackhole support for all APIs
more clean integration with CI and reporting to superset
ttrt/ttir-builder can dump tons of data - we should find a way to visualize all of this in superset

## Support
TODO: Potentially add information on FAQs and where to seek customer-support

## Contributing and feedback
TODO: Potentially add information on community engagement/contributions/feedback

## License
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: (c) 2025 Tenstorrent AI ULC

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
