docs/src/ttir-builder/adding-a-ttir-op.md, before:


# Adding a new op to `ttir-builder`

`ttir-builder` is designed to only create ops supported in TTIR. At the moment, most but not all ops are supported, and new ops are still occasionally added to TTIR. Creating `ttir-builder` support for an op entails writing a function in `tools/ttir-builder/builder.py` that will create the op and its golden counterpart.

## TTIR op factories

All ops are created when their relevant information is run through the `op_proxy` function which provides a general interface for proxy-ing and creating ops.

```bash
def op_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    unit_attrs: List[str] = None,
    organize_ttir_args: Optional[Callable] = None,
    organize_golden_args: Optional[Callable] = None,
    output_shape: Optional[Shape] = None,
    output_type: Optional[Type] = None,
    output_create_fn: Optional[Callable] = None,
    golden_kwargs: dict = {},
    ttir_kwargs: dict = {},
)
```

Start by finding the TTIR op you wish to replicate in `include/ttmlir/Dialect/TTIR/IR/TTIROps.td` or the TTIR dialect [documentation](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/tt-mlir/autogen/md/Dialect/TTIROp.html).

All op attributes should be included as arguments in your function and passed into a proxy function as keyword arguments using `ttir_kwargs`.

All input operands should be passed into a proxy function using the argument `inputs`. Output operands are considered inputs and can optionally be passed into `inputs` if their shape or datatype is relevant to the op's result operand. `organize_ttir_args` dictates what information gets passed into autogenerated file `build/python_packages/ttmlir/dialects/_ttir_ops_gen.py` and can be used if operand arguments require special handling.

Before writing a golden function, you need to know exactly what the TTIR op does to its input data because you will have to replicate that exactly using Pytorch operations. This information is usually covered in TTIR documentation, but if not, you may have to take it upon yourself to do some detective work and trial and error.

Writing a golden function is very straightforward if Pytorch has a function that performs exactly the same operation. If so, pass that function into a proxy function as `op_golden_function`, any keywords into `golden_kwargs`, and use `organize_golden_args` if input operands differ from those of the TTIR op.

If Pytorch doesn't have an identical operation, your job is about to get a little harder. Get creative with keyword argument handling, using similar Pytorch operations, and maybe multiple operations. Google is your friend. If you have to figure out how to do something Pytorch doesn't, odds are someone online has encountered the same situation.

Example implementation:

```bash
    def cbrt_golden_function(self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None) -> torch.tensor:
        golden = self._get_golden_tensor(in0)
        golden_sign = torch.sign(golden)
        golden_cbrt = torch.pow(torch.abs(golden), 1 / 3)
        return golden_cbrt

    def cbrt(self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None) -> OpView:
        return self.op_proxy(
            cbrt_golden_function,
            ttir.CbrtOp,
            [in0],
            golden_kwargs={"input": golden_sign, "other": golden_cbrt},
            organize_golden_args=lambda i: 0,
            unit_attrs=unit_attrs,
        )
```

### Eltwise operations

Element-wise ops require less specialized handling and call `op_proxy` through `eltwise_proxy`.

```bash
def eltwise_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    unit_attrs: List[str] = None,
)
```

CCL ops require `GoldenCheckLevel` to be set to `GRAPH_LEVEL` and integrate that into their own proxy function.

```bash
def ccl_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    kwargs: dict = {},
)
```

## Adding Silicon tests
Silicon tests are created in the `test/python/golden` directory.
```bash
pytest test/python/golden/test_ttir_ops.py
```
Be sure to file an issue for failing tests and add a pytest mark for any failing or unsupported tests. The pytest marks instruct CI to ignore tests.
```bash
pytest.mark.skip("Issue number") : skip flatbuffer creation for this test
pytest.mark.fails_golden : expect this test to fail the ttrt golden check
pytest.mark.skip_target("ttmetal") : skip ttmetal flatbuffer creation, an op in this test has no support in ttmetal
```

For tests exclusive to n300 or llmbox, use the following pytest marks or add them to their respective test files.
```bash
pytestmark = pytest.mark.n300
pytestmark = pytest.mark.llmbox
```

## Running Silicon tests
Follow these steps. The directory `test/python/golden` contains tests for modules, individual ops, and various machines.
```bash
1. Build ttmlir
source env/activate
cmake -G Ninja -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang-17 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++-17 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER_LAUNCHER=ccache -DTTMLIR_ENABLE_RUNTIME=ON -DTT_RUNTIME_ENABLE_PERF_TRACE=ON
cmake --build build

2. Build ttrt (sample instructions - subject to change)
cmake --build build -- ttrt

3. Query system
ttrt query --save-artifacts

4. Export system desc file
export SYSTEM_DESC_PATH=/path/to/system_desc.ttsys (path dumped in previous command)

5. Generate test cases
pytest test/python/golden/test_ttir_ops.py

6. Run test cases
ttrt run ttnn
ttrt run ttmetal
```

## Sphinx documentation

### Docstrings
Sphinx generates documentation for builder ops from the docstrings in `TTIRBuilder` functions. This is the structure to follow when writing your docstring

```bash
"""
Creates ``ttir.add``.

*Elementwise addition operation.*

Performs elementwise addition between two tensors.
For each pair of corresponding elements, adds the element in the second
tensor to the element in the first tensor.

Mathematical definition: add(x, y) = x + y

.. code-block:: mlir

    // Add corresponding elements
    %result = ttir.add(%lhs, %rhs, %output) : tensor<3xf32>, tensor<3xf32>, tensor<3xf32> -> tensor<3xf32>
    // Input tensors:
    // lhs: [3.5, 0.0, -1.2]
    // rhs: [1.5, 2.0, -3.2]
    // Output tensor:
    // [5.0, 2.0, -4.4]

Parameters
----------
in0 : Operand
    First input tensor
in1 : Operand
    Second input tensor
unit_attrs : Optional[List[str]], optional
    Optional list of unit attributes

Returns
-------
*OpView*
    A tensor containing the elementwise sum of the inputs
"""
```

### Autogen skip
All functions in `TTIRBuilder` are included in documentation by default. If your op is failing any of the tests, it can't yet be added to the documentation. Custom golden functions also must be excluded. Tag those functions with `autodoc_skip`.

```bash
@autodoc_skip
def bitwise_not(
    self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None
) -> OpView:
```

Commit message:

Run builder tests on `p150`s (blackholes) in CI (#3913)
### Ticket
Closes #3898

### Problem description
We are not running builder tests on blackholes in CI

### What's changed
- Adds builder tests to CI on blackhole machines (specifically `p150`s)
- Adds clarity to a `ttrt run` flag, elucidating its necessity on
blackholes
- Adds a set based skip mechanism for tests that fail to function on
specific intersections of targets and systems. See the `skip_config`
mark in `pytest.ini` for more information.

### Notes
Also fixes alignment in `build-and-test.yml`. This makes the diff a
little hard to read, the only material change is on line 177 where a new
matrix entry is added for `p150`

### Future Work
Once more blackhole machines (`p300`, etc) are added to the CI, these
must also be added to the `build-and-test.yml` matrix

### Checklist
- [x] New/Existing tests provide coverage for changes

docs/src/ttir-builder/adding-a-ttir-op.md, after:


# Adding a new op to `ttir-builder`

`ttir-builder` is designed to only create ops supported in TTIR. At the moment, most but not all ops are supported, and new ops are still occasionally added to TTIR. Creating `ttir-builder` support for an op entails writing a function in `tools/ttir-builder/builder.py` that will create the op and its golden counterpart.

## TTIR op factories

All ops are created when their relevant information is run through the `op_proxy` function which provides a general interface for proxy-ing and creating ops.

```bash
def op_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    unit_attrs: List[str] = None,
    organize_ttir_args: Optional[Callable] = None,
    organize_golden_args: Optional[Callable] = None,
    output_shape: Optional[Shape] = None,
    output_type: Optional[Type] = None,
    output_create_fn: Optional[Callable] = None,
    golden_kwargs: dict = {},
    ttir_kwargs: dict = {},
)
```

Start by finding the TTIR op you wish to replicate in `include/ttmlir/Dialect/TTIR/IR/TTIROps.td` or the TTIR dialect [documentation](https://docs.tenstorrent.com/tt-mlir/autogen/md/Dialect/TTIROp.html).

All op attributes should be included as arguments in your function and passed into a proxy function as keyword arguments using `ttir_kwargs`.

All input operands should be passed into a proxy function using the argument `inputs`. Output operands are considered inputs and can optionally be passed into `inputs` if their shape or datatype is relevant to the op's result operand. `organize_ttir_args` dictates what information gets passed into autogenerated file `build/python_packages/ttmlir/dialects/_ttir_ops_gen.py` and can be used if operand arguments require special handling.

Before writing a golden function, you need to know exactly what the TTIR op does to its input data because you will have to replicate that exactly using Pytorch operations. This information is usually covered in TTIR documentation, but if not, you may have to take it upon yourself to do some detective work and trial and error.

Writing a golden function is very straightforward if Pytorch has a function that performs exactly the same operation. If so, pass that function into a proxy function as `op_golden_function`, any keywords into `golden_kwargs`, and use `organize_golden_args` if input operands differ from those of the TTIR op.

If Pytorch doesn't have an identical operation, your job is about to get a little harder. Get creative with keyword argument handling, using similar Pytorch operations, and maybe multiple operations. Google is your friend. If you have to figure out how to do something Pytorch doesn't, odds are someone online has encountered the same situation.

Example implementation:

```bash
    def cbrt_golden_function(self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None) -> torch.tensor:
        golden = self._get_golden_tensor(in0)
        golden_sign = torch.sign(golden)
        golden_cbrt = torch.pow(torch.abs(golden), 1 / 3)
        return golden_cbrt

    def cbrt(self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None) -> OpView:
        return self.op_proxy(
            cbrt_golden_function,
            ttir.CbrtOp,
            [in0],
            golden_kwargs={"input": golden_sign, "other": golden_cbrt},
            organize_golden_args=lambda i: 0,
            unit_attrs=unit_attrs,
        )
```

### Eltwise operations

Element-wise ops require less specialized handling and call `op_proxy` through `eltwise_proxy`.

```bash
def eltwise_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    unit_attrs: List[str] = None,
)
```

CCL ops require `GoldenCheckLevel` to be set to `GRAPH_LEVEL` and integrate that into their own proxy function.

```bash
def ccl_proxy(
    self,
    op_golden_function: Callable,
    op_ttir_function: Callable,
    inputs: List[Operand],
    kwargs: dict = {},
)
```

## Adding Silicon tests
Silicon tests are created in the `test/python/golden` directory.
```bash
pytest test/python/golden/test_ttir_ops.py
```
Be sure to file an issue for failing tests and add a pytest mark for any failing or unsupported tests. The pytest marks instruct CI to ignore tests.
```bash
pytest.mark.skip("Issue number") : skip flatbuffer creation for this test
pytest.mark.fails_golden : expect this test to fail the ttrt golden check
pytest.mark.skip_config(config, ... reason=None): skip test if all of the specified targets/backends per config are present
```

The `skip_config` mark here is a little nuanced. By passing in a list of
strings representing targets and/or systems (e.g. `["ttmetal", "p150"]`) this
mark will intelligently skip tests with that configuration. The example given
will skip tests lowered to `ttmetal` iff we are runing on a `p150` (i.e.
blackhole). This functionality will be expanded to include other axes of test
configuration, but target and system are sufficient for our needs at the
moment.

For tests exclusive to n300 or llmbox, use the following pytest marks or add them to their respective test files.
```bash
pytestmark = pytest.mark.n300
pytestmark = pytest.mark.llmbox
```

## Running Silicon tests
Follow these steps. The directory `test/python/golden` contains tests for modules, individual ops, and various machines.
```bash
1. Build ttmlir
source env/activate
cmake -G Ninja -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang-17 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++-17 -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER_LAUNCHER=ccache -DTTMLIR_ENABLE_RUNTIME=ON -DTT_RUNTIME_ENABLE_PERF_TRACE=ON
cmake --build build

2. Build ttrt (sample instructions - subject to change)
cmake --build build -- ttrt

3. Query system
ttrt query --save-artifacts

4. Export system desc file
export SYSTEM_DESC_PATH=/path/to/system_desc.ttsys (path dumped in previous command)

5. Generate test cases
pytest test/python/golden/test_ttir_ops.py

6. Run test cases
ttrt run ttnn
ttrt run ttmetal
```

## Sphinx documentation

### Docstrings
Sphinx generates documentation for builder ops from the docstrings in `TTIRBuilder` functions. This is the structure to follow when writing your docstring

```bash
"""
Creates ``ttir.add``.

*Elementwise addition operation.*

Performs elementwise addition between two tensors.
For each pair of corresponding elements, adds the element in the second
tensor to the element in the first tensor.

Mathematical definition: add(x, y) = x + y

.. code-block:: mlir

    // Add corresponding elements
    %result = ttir.add(%lhs, %rhs, %output) : tensor<3xf32>, tensor<3xf32>, tensor<3xf32> -> tensor<3xf32>
    // Input tensors:
    // lhs: [3.5, 0.0, -1.2]
    // rhs: [1.5, 2.0, -3.2]
    // Output tensor:
    // [5.0, 2.0, -4.4]

Parameters
----------
in0 : Operand
    First input tensor
in1 : Operand
    Second input tensor
unit_attrs : Optional[List[str]], optional
    Optional list of unit attributes

Returns
-------
*OpView*
    A tensor containing the elementwise sum of the inputs
"""
```

### Autogen skip
All functions in `TTIRBuilder` are included in documentation by default. If your op is failing any of the tests, it can't yet be added to the documentation. Custom golden functions also must be excluded. Tag those functions with `autodoc_skip`.

```bash
@autodoc_skip
def bitwise_not(
    self, in0: Operand, unit_attrs: Optional[List[str]] = None
) -> OpView:
```
